should accept yourself just the way you
are what does that say about who I
should become is that just now off the
table because I'm already good enough in
every way so am I done or something get
the hell up get your act together adopt
some responsibility put your life
together develop a vision unfold all
those manifold possibilities that lurk
within be a force for good in the world
and that'll be the adventure of your
life
[Music]
and you know my my great grandfather was
president of the University he's buried
on their campus I mean I came from a my
wife's uh mother Joanna was one of the
incredible teachers in Oklahoma City in
fact the quick story that's worth
telling about that we're having one of
these exhibitions I talked about and
this woman comes up to me and we're in
Austin Texas and she comes up and she
said
you know this reminds me
of my eighth grade science teacher and
she said I live in Oklahoma City I came
to see this and it reminds me of her and
she started describing this wonderful
teacher who was Socratic and who did all
the things and she said
um she got finished and I said and her
name was Joanna Anderson oh
and the lady said how in the world could
you have known that and I said because
that's her daughter Laura and the woman
just started crying and she said that
lady changed my life right so adults
have an important role to play in a
child's life yeah
that role shouldn't be to be an
authoritarian
you know having order to sit at a desk
where a bell rings every 45 minutes yeah
that's not the teacher's fault that's
the system right it's the system now
you're participating in the system yeah
but I always try to do you know I try to
divide the teachers are often the heroes
and sometimes not
the system's the problem and I don't
think there's anyone who doesn't think
the system is broken
hello everyone I'm pleased today to be
speaking with Jeff Sandifer who's
someone I've known for a number of years
and worked together on a variety of
projects um we're going to talk today
about childhood education and about his
background depending on which platform
you're viewing
Jeff is an entrepreneur and a Socratic
teacher which is a teacher by the way
who tends to ask questions rather than
provide answers he began his first
business at the age of 16.
then trained as an engineer and then
went on to graduate from the Harvard
Business School
he has started and run many successful
businesses the most recent of which is
Sandifer Capital Partners an oil and gas
investment firm with several billion
dollars in assets
he's also started multiple academic
programs in schools I'm going to
concentrate on that today such as the
Acton School of Business whose students
were named the most competitive mbas in
the nation by the Princeton Review
he's extended this work
over the last 15 years into the K-12
Realm
kindergarten through grade 12 with the
Acton Academy a Cutting Edge program
that blends the one-room schoolhouse the
Socratic method and 21st century
technology
to Aid each student in changing the
world themselves and the world
so Jeff we get a chance to sit down and
talk today and to share that with a very
large number of people so it's we're we
Jeff and I were talking before this
podcast about what we wanted to talk
about and
last night we thought about
construing this in terms of educational
reform but really the proper way to
set this conversation up is to talk
about education not so much reform but
education per se and so let's start a
little bit by talking about your
background though and we might as well
go back to I guess your your your early
experiences in in early adulthood and
let's lay that out and then we can we
can
we can place in the educational
discussion as as appropriate sure and I
you know I I think as you say today that
I'm here more as a father and a husband
you know than than
um an educator or even a Socratic
teacher but I really started live
um as an entrepreneur uh age 16 I had my
first real business we made a hundred
thousand dollars in profits which as old
as I am back then that was real money
um by age 26 I'd taken a million dollar
investment and within four years turned
it into 500 million dollars in profits
so what was your first business uh oil
and gas exploration F-16 yeah 16 we were
actually painting uh tanks out in the
hot west Texas Sun
and my father had had me working in the
oil field as a laborer
and I didn't want to do that anymore
um so I found I could hire the high
school football coaches at our local
high school and instead of paying uh
workers by the hour I paid them by the
job they hired their football players
underneath them and their productivity
was nine times higher than the average
uh than the average Cruise so we went
out and competed
charged two-thirds with our competitors
charged and had 80 percent profit
margins so why were they more efficient
uh because they were getting paid by the
tank by what they did you had the
incentives and so they would show up at
the you know Break of Dawn and work till
dusk who the people who were being paid
in those days two dollars and fifteen
cents an hour
had no incentive to work hard so it was
just purely incentive work ethic uh you
can imagine football players and coaches
or conscientious yeah yeah and so
um you know it was a home run why did
they take you seriously when you were so
young
I think because if you think about
coaches during the summer they had
nothing else to do what do they have to
get a chance to work with their team too
right and what do they have to lose
right they're not doing anything anyway
so it was kind of one of those things
where you could put together uh pieces
of a deal to make the pipe bigger for
everyone right right and it just worked
it's exciting to give people an
opportunity to to experience a direct
return on their immediate investment I
mean one of the things that's nice about
Hands-On labor carpentry and and yes and
Contracting so forth is you immediately
see what you produce and the harder you
work the more there is of it and so yes
obviously you built those incentives in
and so then you you you you took that
money and you further invested it you
said you into something that generated a
million dollars and how did that happen
well I actually didn't went off and got
an engineering degree I went to Harvard
Business School and then when I got out
of Harvard Business School I raised a
million dollars and we went out and we
drilled the oil and gas wells in the
Gulf of Mexico and you know through hard
work a lot of luck good timing we turned
that million dollars into 500 million
dollars in profits in four years for our
for our investors and our employees and
ourselves and so I'm at now age 29.
I've got more money than I'll ever spend
I don't spend much money yeah I'm a
cheap guy yeah yeah what do I do next
and so um I decided to take a year off
to become a Socratic teacher in lead
case discussions at the University of
Texas MBA program and that changed my
life and so for 35 years now I've been
uh going on 40 years I've been a
Socratic teacher okay so let's let's
define that for everyone sure so
Socratic teacher and this case method
yes so let's go into what constitutes a
Socratic teacher first so um you're put
in the shoes of someone facing a
real-life dilemma
where there is no right answer their
moral choices you're going to have to
trade off efficiency and money and what
you want to do with your life and then
you uh you've worked maybe 10 hours
preparing this case this 10 to 100 page
case
might be about Enron uh might be about
acting academy we have a Harvard case
about Acton our school and then it's Mr
Peterson
you're not a doctor then you're going to
be younger uh Mr Peterson what would you
do invest or not right and so you then
you have to make your case their counter
cases and you know the Socratic method
is interesting the way we practice it
there's only two questions
would you do a or b next right right and
then the second question is what do you
mean by a yeah it's definitional so the
entire Socratic method is just helping
people understand what to do next
and why and when you say
what you're going to do exactly what are
you going to do right so it's the
interrogation of a story so yes the
thing about a story that makes it that
makes it unique is that it it provides a
deeply contextualized representation of
something complex yes and you see this
happening in a court case when we're
trying to decide whether someone is
guilty or innocent really what we do is
set up a dialogue between competing
narratives yes right and so the defense
Bones the defense narrative and the
prosecution amounts of prosecution
narrative and then what you're
attempting to do is weigh the narratives
yes now using the Socratic method as
well
as you pointed out you're going to be
asking people questions and getting them
to inquire after definitions and then
you said this is very strategically
oriented so it has to produce a binary
outcome a decision related outcome yes
with the strategy associated with that
yes in in psychotherapeutic practice one
of the things you learn very rapidly
pretty much all therapists of any school
of repute who are well trained know this
is that
you can't really
give people advice about what to do you
have to ask them to delineate out the
problem you have to ask them to lay out
what they might see as a solution and
you can interrogate that and then
encourage them to step through all the
intermediary
uh steps towards the solution and I
think the reason that works is that
unless people walk through all of that
if they're just delivered the
prepackaged solution they actually have
a no idea how to implement it but also
no real motivation to implement it yeah
there's no there's no drama to it
there's no part of life I mean something
I've learned from listening to you you
know about the power a story you don't
have any of that and also for the real
world there's no action I mean there are
consequences eventually you're going to
go out and do these things yourself and
and I think I was a straight A student
and you know a good student when I was
younger but it was all about learning to
know and so this method is more about
learning to learn what are the routines
and the recipes that we go through
learning to do something that requires
courage and then that leads to learning
to be who you're going to become yeah
well it seems to me like it's something
like an analysis not so much of much of
what the facts tell you the next step
should be because you never really get
to that point it's more like a
delineation of the principles by which
you're going to operate and an
exploration of what principles you're
willing to put Faith in and I would say
the reason I would use the language of
faith is because you have to LEAP into
the unknown absolutely right and so you
want to be informed while you do that
but but you don't have the data at hand
and you won't until you run the
experiment right so and so where were
you doing the case studies well so I
learned the method at the Harvard
Business School and then I took that in
my own exploration of trying to figure
out what to do with my own life and it
age 28 was teaching a room full of 28
year old graduate students at the
University of Texas and so that was and
you know as you said what you're doing
if you do a hundred cases you're seeing
pattern after pattern after pattern much
like the stories you might see in the
Bible and you're learning through these
patterns and to have the courage to then
go do it yourself as you point out in
the face of of uncertainty yeah well you
know you're doing something that that
brought up two ideas for me one is
well you're exposing yourself to a
number of a diverse number of cases
right yes and then what you're doing you
do the same thing that these Advanced
language processing models do yes you're
looking for commonalities across the
narratives and as you gather more and
more narratives within a certain domain
you you start to understand the
underlying principles yes so this is
what happened in the book of Exodus by
the way when because before Moses uh is
has the Commandments revealed to him
he sits for an unknown amount of time
Dawn till midnight every day judging the
Israelites and their complaints and so
we hear thousands and thousands of cases
right and then you can imagine that the
Revelation is the it's the revelation of
the substructure of what constitutes
Justice itself yes and but you can't get
to that without this case analysis so
why with all the money at your disposal
and the hypothetical Freedom that that
might have
um bestowed upon you yeah why did you
decide to well stay actively working
stay actively employed now you were a
professor at utexas yes I was an adjunct
you're an adjunct in the business school
in the business school okay but and so
you decided to continue doing that and
what was driving you in to do that
because I was fascinated with asking
questions and and you know the the
difference from a Judicial setting and
the way we practice the case method is
in the judicial setting eventually a
jury or a judge is going to decide
what's right in our sitting it's the
actor themselves playing out the act so
I was fascinated and frankly I didn't
know what to do with my own life I mean
I had first started my first business to
get out of the hot sun I started the
second business so I could make more
money than my father I wanted to
overcome him oh yeah yeah but then I did
that and it's like you're 28 what next
right I didn't know so I went to
actually learn myself and by you know
asking questions and digging in and then
were you ever tempted on the hedonistic
front I mean you're pretty young at that
point you have the world at your feet in
some real sense so well I'm not exactly
Brad Pitt so I don't think the
hedonistic part of chasing girls
well no it doesn't help it does help
apparently didn't help enough but yeah
but no no I just never was interested
the hedonistic thing just didn't didn't
really appeal to me
um well I had a father who I loved
dearly but he was rich one year and
broke the next but always lived as if we
had money
and there was something about that I
didn't like now I'm sure there's
something our children don't like about
me so that's a typical father or son
yeah you know judging it but but I think
that that
um it set up something in me that I've
always been more about competence than
Prestige and so chasing Prestige to me
just never felt right and so the
hedonistic Roots uh would have felt
Prestige overcompetence is narcissism
yeah so so I just so so I just that just
didn't wasn't appealing but I was lost
and so how long lost when I was lost at
29. uh
people only ask they're only desperate
when there's no hope and they hit rock
bottom yeah or you get to the top and
you ask is that all there is right so
I'm at the top
and I have to ask is that all that is it
all there is and I said I don't know
what to do except to go socratically
explore with a group of us right well
that's that's a good thing if you're if
you're somewhere and you don't know what
to do
exploring seems like a good idea right
it is definitely the case that the the
only genuine Pathway to exploration is
something like the pursuit of the
questions that honestly plagued you yeah
right and so you know and there's a
destiny in that too that's extremely
interesting because
a different set of problems plagues each
individual yes right so you're going to
have doubts everyone does but you're
going to have your doubts and the
strange thing about your own doubts is
that your doubts contain the seeds of
your progress yes because if you pursue
those doubts first of all they're
stopping you because they're doubts if
you pursue them and you and you Rectify
them then you're going to find a pathway
forward but you can't do that without
honest questioning well and and to to
foreshadow what will happen later you
know this set up everything that uh my
wife Laura who really gets credit for
the schools we've built but it sets up
everything it's the hero's journey story
right it's Pilgrim's Progress it's the
hero going out looking for the Grail
fighting dragons and monsters
and then you realize when you get to the
end it wasn't about the Grail at all
that's how the hero changed in the
process and so it really began to set up
that pattern over and over and over
again right Eternal transformation right
as a consequence of learning you know
one of the things I've I've thought
about Joe Rogan a lot because Rogan's
success on the media front I would say
is unparalleled yes he has the number
one podcast in a hundred countries wow
right it's not there I think he's the
most significant media figure who ever
lived possibly in terms of sheer numbers
and breadth of reach and he runs a
shoestring operation it's really just
him and his producer he picks all his
guests and all he does is ask them the
questions that he actually has and and
what's so interesting about that is well
it's made Joe an incredibly
well-informed person I mean yeah because
he's I think he's done it's some
thousands of podcasts now so he's had
thousands of hours of case studies let's
say but he also can bring his listeners
on the same Journey because yes the
probability that he's asking an honest
question that that will be a question
that resounds with his audience is
extremely high and it's so interesting
to see how much power there is in that
is that his stripped down approach
which also requires virtually no editing
and certainly no special effects his
stripped down approach is the most
compelling approach and I think it is
because it's based on an honestocratic
owner Socratic method but it does
require curiosity and it requires a
genuine interest and and true choices
and one of the hardest things is
Socratic teacher is
if you you never ask a question you know
the answer to it has to be an equal
balanced question it has to be fair
right and so if you're trying otherwise
putting your thumb on the scale the
other person immediately will know it
and so I when I've listened to to you on
Joe Rogan and Rogan's podius he's
incredibly good at listening and asking
a very honest question yeah there's no
and people would spot it if he was
absolutely yeah
here's the deal the government keeps
raising rates because it's the only tool
they have to keep inflation under
control and it's not working you can't
spend your way out of inflation you've
seen the impact on the stock market and
you've seen the impact on your savings
hedge inflation by owning gold whether
physical gold and silver in your safe or
through an IRA in Precious Metals where
you can hold real gold and silver in
attack sheltered retirement account buy
gold and get a free safe to store it in
that's right on qualifying purchases
from Birch gold group now through March
31st they'll ship a free safe directly
to your door just text Jordan to 989898
to get your free info kit on gold and to
claim eligibility for your free safe
then talk to one of their precious
metals Specialists that's Jordan to
989898 today
there is an old a very old religious
insistence that pride is a cardinal sin
and that humility is the virtue that
counters pride and then you have to ask
well what does it mean what does
humility mean and it means something
like
admission of ignorance yeah but what's
so useful about that and why it's a
virtue and why it's something very
useful to practice is that if you do
admit to your ignorance which is to note
what you don't know and to dare ask it
right then you immediately Rectify I
told my daughter for example oh you know
very straightforwardly
um
you only have to ask a stupid question
once if you listen to the answer right
so so she's been in many situations
where you know she was in over her head
like well like we all are yes very often
like me today well and it is very
tempting to pretend that you know and
and to not ask the stupid question but
first of all almost everybody around
who's participating let's say in the
conversation has the same stupid
question and second if you don't ask it
well then you remain stupid so that's
not helpful and well well you know I
think this was a great lesson of like a
lot I've learned about about Parenthood
and about having this same approach with
your children I mean you know this and
I've seen you with with Julian up close
of you know being generally interested
but offering choices and listening and
caring as a parent and so you know I
didn't have children at this point but I
have a room for 28 year olds that are
bright and we can explore life together
in entrepreneurship and how you make
money and what it means if you make
money
um and that ended up being I spent quite
a time at the University of Texas we
built up the entrepreneurship program we
won all sorts of awards
um and then spun off our own business
school why did the why why was it well
received do you think and and why did
the why was it also two inch two things
well received by the students but
obviously it was also well received by
the administration
okay it was well received and you know
enough about Academia the teachers so
the professors who were teachers loved
us what we did though is we had a very
firm very hard contract of what was
required to be in the class we graded on
a forced curve when everyone else gave
all A's the harder we made the program
the more people we attracted yeah yeah
and so but but at some point uh I think
our teachers who were all entrepreneurs
who had been successful so all adjuncts
oh yeah one the teacher of the year
award 11 out of 11 years
which and how big a group was that well
we for the uh there were 141 professors
and our group of eight were teaching 25
of all the elective hours in the school
as adjuncts wow as adjuncts and so being
paid nothing yes so you can imagine what
happens next in this story yeah right
right so we're basically all fired we
all quit depending on which story you
want yeah yeah we go start our own
school and we focus on what was this
this would have been two thousand and
what was I see and so that was after
eight years yes eight years and what was
the rationale for the
firing slash quitting
um
probably that I was too disagreeable
which was fair
um
but I will say I got a call from inside
the school from someone and he said look
a tinkered professor and he said look I
have to tell you they're going to fire
half of you this summer and the other
other half
um at Christmas because and we were at
that point attracting more than half of
all the students to the school and
teaching a quarter of them and they said
they just you know
the the tingered political faculty just
doesn't
want you here
so we decided we were going to teach one
last class off campus across the street
from the campus
and um
130 people showed up for no credit they
drove credit they drove from Waco from
Houston to Austin from Dallas to Austin
so they came from all over including
faculty from those schools and we
thought you know what
maybe we should have our own MBA program
right now we knew nothing about that
that was impossible right no one ever
told us you couldn't get a credit but we
managed to build a program we ended up
winning all sorts of awards from
Princeton Review with really Navy Seals
Olympic athletes and young entrepreneurs
and we built this hundred hour a week
10-month program that was just brutal
but changed our lives and changed the
lives of the students so that was right
after you were at the University of
Texas yeah yeah we were fired and it was
right the next thing we did was have
this free class and the next thing after
that was launch our own NBA program and
so what was the rationale for dispensing
with you guys I mean it must have been
somewhat difficult given the fact that
well it was half the students it was
very popular yeah there was an outcry
but as the dean put it to the students
at that point you are not our customers
our customers are the pursuit of
scholarly knowledge
and so your opinion doesn't really
matter was what they were told
so anyway we spun off it was successful
it was a lot of fun
um and
really I'm I'm now you know still doing
some business things mostly teaching
this program's a lot of fun
and then we come to kind of one of the
most important things in my life and
that is
um our two young boys are in Montessori
School
and they're just about so you had them
after you left the University of Texas
and started this now independent program
right so this is didn't have
accreditation for the independent
program we did get accreditation we did
we managed to get accreditation because
we won all these Awards and they had to
give us accreditation who who awarded
you accreditation uh sex we were we had
sex accreditation through a small
University that my great-grandfather had
been president of at the turn of the
century and sax is oh the southern
accrediting Association so it's one of
the regional accreditors right you got
associated with a small college but it
didn't matter because as long as you
have accreditation right do you have
accreditation right right right and so
accreditation was set up so that well so
that in principle so that there was some
what would you say consistency
reliability and validity to the SI
nation of a of a degree I mean that's
the theory that's the theory what it
really serves as of course is a
protection of the cartel right I mean
it's not really that but we managed to
get it wasn't an issue
um and and you know we built the program
by the then I've got these two children
Charlie and Sam and they're about to
leave from Montessori to get ready to go
to elementary school so I go to see the
very best teacher and the very best
middle school in Austin that's teaching
our daughter who's older
and I said when should we move the boys
into a regular school
and I'll never forget this this
gentleman was an African-American he
looked like Abraham Lincoln tall stately
you know very one he and he said as soon
as possible
and I said well why and he said well
once they've had that kind of Freedom
they won't want to be chained to a desk
for eight hours a day and talk to them
so we get them in get them in Chains
Young
and I I was kind of stunned and I said
well I don't blame them I just blurted
that out and he looked down at the
ground for the longest time
and he looked up and he had tears in his
eyes and he shook his head very quietly
and he said I don't either
so I went home that day and I told Laura
I said I don't know if we're going to
homeschool I don't know if we're going
to start a school
but our boys are the best teacher in
this town just told me not to put them
in Traditional School so we're going to
do something else do you know Paul Gotti
no okay Gotti I hope I have his name
right he was a teacher of the year in
New York state a number of years and he
wrote he died unfortunately I wanted to
interview him but that never was never
possible
he was no uh admirer of the current
education system let's say and he wrote
a history of the education system which
was extremely interesting
he pointed out that the public education
in the in the United States I was
investigating this because I was
wondering why our school systems are so
bad at fostering individual Vision yes
because it's such a lack I thought why
this is such a lot there's something
going on here okay
depressions established the first public
education system and the reason they did
it was because the Prussian Emperor
wanted to produce obedient soldiers you
know disciplined obedient soldiers no I
don't want to get cynical about that
because in a society that requires a
military disciplined
people who can follow rules are arguably
necessary now obviously that can go very
badly right but but we've got to give
the devil is due and the oppressions
actually put forward a very effective
military training system now that was
adopted in the United States in the late
1800s by industrialists mostly
self-proclaimed fascists so at that time
of course it wasn't Mussolini Hitler
like fascism it was far the early
precursors of that but they were people
who believed that the state and the uh
the corporate world could integrate at
the highest levels and there might be
some utility in that which is a very
dubious claim nonetheless
so they noticed that they knew that
all sorts of rural people were pouring
into the cities to start working in
factories their kids needed to be cared
for while they worked and then their
kids were likely to have factory jobs
and so the purpose of the public
education system this is why there's
rows of desks and Factory bells and this
insistence on timing was to produce
disciplined obedient workers certainly
not to produce people who were
autonomous and
um that was adopted in the U.S the
Japanese adopted it and militarized like
mad and part of the consequence of that
was the outbreak of the second world war
and but
but that being chained to a desk that's
not a bug that was a feature right right
and you know you can also even say well
let's give it some credence
a rural uh worker
their their time schedules must like
stringent than someone who's going to
work on a factory right they're on an
agrarian Farm they're on a farm yeah
you're much looser in your time sense
and it is the case that
industrialization requires
clock yes and so
you have to give the devil is due but in
a somewhat post-industrial World which
is what we're in now it's not obvious at
all that obedient worker slash Soldier
is the right model for human development
right and so okay so back to yourself
so so really not knowing any of that
which I would find out later we just
wanted something different for our
children so we started out with a blank
sheet of paper this is all about the
time Khan Academy and some great new
things on the internet are bubbling with
the Socratic method and said what would
we design for our children
and this is you and your wife yeah and
my wife gets to be careful just like
Tammy's special Laura is the one that
did all this and I kind of come into the
picture later but she's I mean I'm I'm
helping from behind the scenes but she's
she's really the person who's building
this we start out with seven children
um where did you get the other kids uh
by talking to everybody in town and
seeing who would be crazy enough to join
us now by that point the acting MBA
named after Lord Acton power tends to
corrupt absolute power corrupts
absolutely the acting NBA is pretty well
known in town so the fact we start this
thing called Acton Academy it has a
little bit of linkage in Austin to be
something people might trust us with
their children right right right so
you've got a bit of you got a bit of
communication classes yeah so there was
enough reputational you know that we we
were able to attract some very committed
families uh the school takes off
uh it starts to grow
um it's all based on one Mission we
stayed true to from the start that every
child who enters our school is a genius
who deserves to find a calling that will
change the world
[Music]
just like physical exercise daily
spiritual exercise is critical to your
well-being especially in a world where
attacks on faith and religion are
happening all around us every day
there's no better time for a daily habit
of prayer than during this season of
lent with hallow the number one
Christian Prayer app in the U.S and the
number one Catholic app in the world
with hallow you can pray every single
day leading up to Easter alongside world
famous Catholics and Christians like Jim
Caviezel father Mike Schmitz and even
Mark Wahlberg dive deep into scripture
and the second most read Christian book
of all time the imitation of Christ
you'll learn how to become a better
individual through prayer fasting and
giving in spite of today's broken World
download the app for free at hallow.com
Jordan set prayer reminders invite
others to pray with you and track your
progress along the way get an exclusive
three-month free trial at hallow.com
Jordan that's hallow.com Jordan
Now by genius we don't mean 180 IQ what
we mean is a special talent at something
because if you're the best plumber in
town right you're going to make more
money and be happier than the average
ivy league graduate plus your your
customers won't be knee deep in sewage
which is also well that's a good major
plus that's a very plus yeah you know
when I was at Harvard lecturing there
one of my students who you know Daniel
Higgins oh yes um we were working on
formulation of theories of General
cognitive ability and and then
personality predictors of success at the
same time
Howard Gardner was working at the
faculties of educate faculty of
Education there and he produced this
theory of multiple intelligence and
it's a Preposterous theory on
psychometric and scientific grounds
partly because
Gardner famously noted that he didn't
really care about measurement and yeah
that's a no-go if you're right it's like
well there are multiple intelligences
but we can't measure any of them right
right but but you know having said that
again you have to give the devil is due
is that
cognitive ability does seem to have a
unidimensional structure there's sort of
there's one dimension of being smarter
not being smart and the smarter you are
the faster you can learn a complex jaw
and so for complex jobs that's very
useful but the idea that there are
multiple talents that's a fine idea you
know and you see that reflected more in
temperament is that open people are
creative and agreeable people like to
take care of people and uh disagreeable
people are competitive and and tough and
conscientious people are hard-working
and dutiful and extroverted people like
socializing and so the idea that each
person
is composed of a composite of traits and
that that composite is unique and that's
that out of that unique composite
something unique and valuable can emerge
that seems extraordinarily probable well
and I'd say the biggest finding we've
had has been that children are capable
of far more than you've ever imagined
children will play down to an
institutionalized system but if freed
along with structure and responsibility
and systems they will build are capable
of incredible things you know in the in
the Michaela school which takes a very
different approach to you in the UK
um it's an inner city school and there's
a wide range of General cognitive
ability as a consequence so you can
imagine in a typical class of 30 kids
there would be kids with an IQ of 90 on
the low end likely up to maybe 85 on the
low end and then maybe up to 130 on the
high end right so a real distribution
but
they're teaching at a very high rate and
75 percent of their graduates
get accepted to Russell group
universities in the UK and Russell group
includes what the big UK universities so
they've managed to set up a system where
regardless of that immense variability
in innate intelligence let's say there's
there's tremendous emphasis on on rapid
learning well so
here's where here's where we might
differ a bit or at least what we've
discovered and what we've discovered is
you know a IQ no question is the most
important determiner of success or you
know socioeconomic success
but it's still only what 25 right that
seems about 25 so what we found is
regardless of IQ if we can build a tribe
where every person there believes that
they have a calling to change the world
that there is a place in that tribe now
if my IQ is 100 I'm not going to be
doing three body orbital problems right
right I mean I just can't Advanced
physics
I can't do that right so that's okay
there's other things I can do yeah so
what we've found is there's very little
uh variability in the ability to learn
to do things if you provide people with
a compelling story and reason yeah if
you provide them with a recipe which is
now you can find a recipe for anything
on the internet
and if you provide them with some sort
of rubric so they can among themselves
judge it and you provide them with some
gamification some way to keep score
that's fun it builds a tribe yeah and if
you can do that and we do this in in
groups of 36
the tribe is so complex and interesting
it's all about the tribe once the tribe
works we get learning happening at a two
to three times average rate and most
importantly the academic subjects become
unimportant they all happen I mean it
happens at a rapid rate but you're
learning self-management self-governance
and how to get along with people and
build a culture and you can have all the
artificial intelligence you want it
can't do those three things okay so how
so okay so now let's go back to when you
started building this school and walk
through it step by step because I really
like to understand more deeply how these
schools operate sure you know in the
Michaela school that I referred to it's
uh it's very structured yes and the
teachers do the guiding and it's clear
that the teachers are the ones in
control and yes I was very impressed
when I went there and her results are
also very impressive the children are
very
secure and they're very pleased to be
there we have about six of them take us
around and they were just randomly
selected from the from the school
population and I asked them a lot of
questions and so they're liking this
um you're taking an approach that also
requires the children to participate in
their own self-organization yes so you
could imagine that you could have a
system where the basic rules of
engagement are established by the
authorities but the game is actually
playable or you could have a system
where the game if it's looser which
would be the system that you set up
where the demand for self-governance is
placed in there to a large degree right
at the beginning and and so this is very
similar to a topvillian society that
develops from the bottom up
um we are providing though they don't
have to invent democracy or Democratic
Republic or a tyrannical government
we'll provide them with choices so you
don't have to prevent everything from a
blank sheet but by experimenting it's a
very Hayek in from the bottom up series
of experiments and they learn by doing
and I'll tell you that you know the
environment is
um it's tyranny one week and Lord of the
Flies the next and they learn to find a
medium between freedom and
responsibility and they're continually
working on the society okay so what
would the experience like so how young
what's the youngest children that you
have in the in the program uh the
youngest will be preschool so so five
four five six okay so what do they
experience their first day of school
okay so at that age group it differs a
little bit so there's 36 in the room
it's mostly montessori-like learning to
do real work so the routines of real
work and free play
and it's only and so you're beginning to
learn to read and write and I'll get
back to that in a minute Elementary
studio is more about important work so
you're doing real chores you're doing
real work you're helping to start
running the studio and you're playing
hard games and that hard game may be
learning math but it's a hard game I
mean right so these are games now by
Middle School
you know you're tackling real world
things your beginning apprenticeships as
early as age 11 or 12. and so you're
actually beginning to take those talents
out in the real world so it changes from
Studio to studio right right so it
starts to broaden right so what happens
with children's games is that as the
children mature the games become more
and more like real world occupations
that's what we're doing and then you
know you could also say interestingly
enough on the adult side the more you
can turn your real world occupation into
a genuine child's game the better you
are at it so it's weird how those things
meet well and that's that's part of
playing this is the realization if
you're always saying we believe you're a
hero is going to change the world here's
a story about Martin Luther King here's
the story of that so when I said there's
a why to doing this you're you're
continually being given archetypal hero
real world stories of flawed Heroes
right yeah perfect Heroes and you're
having to work this out at the same time
you're working out whether I'm going to
hit you in the head at age at five and
if I do their consequences but those
consequences are lie are largely meted
out by eight-year-olds
who are forming their society and
learning to form their society and I
will tell you in our high schoolers and
our middle schoolers
um
80 of them are better than anybody that
graduated from my Harvard Business
School class and culture because all
they're at what at culture it forming a
healthy culture right so is that better
at negotiating it's negotiating it's
carrying um I'll give you a quick
example of how you move up so no grades
the the standards are held by the
community very high standards but here's
how they work
you keep track of the work you've done
and you earn points that's effort yeah
so how much effort are you putting in
yeah every six weeks there's a public
exhibition
The public's invited it's not a science
fair
it's going to be an exhibition of
learning for example if we're doing the
medical biology Quest
these young people will be diagnosing
diseases of people coming in who have a
stack of cards that are their disease
and the winner of the game most
accurately diagnoses real diseases for
real with real cost so what do they
learn
they learn to manage their own health
care which in the United States the
public reward progress but you actually
have standards of attainment at the same
time yes see what there's an overlap
between what you're doing in the
Michaela school because they're also
extremely good at rewarding both
progress and actual levels of attainment
and so the attainment here is did most
of your patients live right at a low
cost and through that you're going to
learn to actually listen and diagnose
diseases even for yourself so badges or
attainment yeah public exhibition points
or effort last piece which is important
is 360 peer reviews every person's asked
is Dr Peterson warm-hearted one to ten
yeah or is Dr Peterson tough-minded
enough one to ten yeah and then I give
you feedback and it can't be you're
stupid
it can be you know when you interrupt me
when I'm working hard
that's really frustrating would you
please when I have the red flag up
not interrupt me when I'm working hard
right so so I'm requesting so I'm
learning how to be a good friend a good
citizen okay so now you've got anything
okay so those are the three things
happening so you've got reward for
progress you've got an absolute standard
of attainment and then you've also got
something like
um evaluation of the manner in which you
conduct yourself within the within the
culture within the group okay so in the
360 process just for those of you who
are watching and listening is that it's
not that easy to figure out how to
evaluate people inside a corporation so
for example if you're trying to evaluate
middle managers you can't get a direct
measure of their sales Effectiveness
because they're three steps removed from
any sales process and so the question is
how do you know if they're succeeding
and how do they know that's a big
question because you can't even get
rewarded unless you know what the
criteria are for success and failure and
so one of the ways that corporations
have learned to deal with this that's
actually quite effective is by doing
these processes they call 360s and in a
360 your subordinates rate you and give
you feedback your peers do and your
superiors do yes and so then that's
aggregated and you can set that up so
that it's not so it's as as
unbiased with relationship to the
hypothetically desirable outcomes as you
can manage but it's an effective way
compiling multiple reports like that is
an effective way of of gaining uh valid
say diagnostic information and a great
way to learn to give and receive valid
criticism right right that it's helpful
criticism this is positive criticism
right so yes and criticism we should
also point out that's not here's what
you're doing wrong that's here's what
you're doing really right because yes
the core of criticism is what you're
doing right but here are things you're
doing that as far as we can tell are
interfering with what you're doing right
and the separating of the wheat from the
chat and that's why almost all of us
offered at the school's growth mindset
praise we appreciate your the method of
what you're doing now again adults can't
do this adults can never make a
declarative sentence on campus adults
can only ask you questions and they're
very few adults because the young people
run everything so let me fast forward a
bit to the story and then we'll come
back
um we're running these it's a lot of fun
um a researcher comes down from my old
Professor Clayton Christensen at Harvard
and said we're going to pick you as one
of the top elementary schools in the
United States
we've only been around 18 months that's
that's really silly they call back and
the researcher says we're actually going
to name you the top elementary school in
the United States or the ones we've
studied and this is the Christensen
Institute so it's a big deal at Harvard
um we're kind of shocked the researcher
and her husband who's CFO of Hawaiian
Airlines
fly from Hawaii to Texas for their first
visit they said can we come visit we
said yes
we get an email from them at the DFW
Airport while they're changing planes
going back to Honolulu we decided we're
moving our family and five children to
Austin so they can attend the school wow
and so we said wow maybe we have
something
about this same time a dear friend and
former student is very successful in
Guatemala ask if he can start a school
so we hand him a big stack of mimeograph
stuff yeah yeah and six months later
we're learning more from him than he is
from us right right so you're starting
to franchise it yeah well actually it
was just like hear a friend a parent
moves out to California and she tells
her husband I'm not leaving if I can't
take the school with me so we hand her a
stack we're learning more I said okay
let's start 10 of these and we can learn
from each other
we'll be right back first we wanted to
give you a sneak peek at Jordan's new
series Exodus
so the Hebrews created history as we
know it
you don't get away with anything and so
you might think you can bend the fabric
of reality and that you can treat people
instrumentally and that you can bow to
the Tyrant and violate your conscience
without cost you will pay the piper it's
going to call you out of that slavery
into Freedom even if that pulls you into
the desert
and we're going to see that there's
something else going on here that is far
more Cosmic and deeper than what you can
imagine the highest
[Music]
Spirit to which we're beholden is
presented precisely as that spirit that
allies itself with the cause of Freedom
against tyranny
I want villains to get punished but do
you want the villains to learn before
they have to pay the ultimate price
that's such a Christian question
yeah are you still operating
fundamentally at the preschool and early
school well we're now beginning to to
have a middle school and that's why I
step in and I end up I end up running
the middle school and the high school
with 45 students
I do that because we've hired this uh
traditional teacher who's won a lot of
awards
and the week before we're going to start
he turns to me and says you know when
these middle schoolers get out of line
you just Jack them up against the
lockers and tell them who's boss and I
went back and told Laura I said you're
going to fire this guy so you might as
well do it now and she said well middle
school is going to start in a week what
am I going to tell the parents and I
said well I'll step in for a little bit
and I'll help and that was my
introduction and then for 13 years I I
did that but suddenly we you know we
have two we have three of these schools
now we're going to have 10
and it just takes off
and fast forward to today we have 18 000
people who have started an audition who
want to start a school
we have 300 schools in 26 countries
and 43 or 44 U.S states and so we built
a model with all these wonderful
entrepreneurial parents and most of the
people that run the schools are people
like you and me that want to do it for
their children and it's a loose
Consortium it's almost like building
Legos or eunuchs or you know it's it's a
network that's continually changing a
model yeah that's improving it and so
now we've got 300 people contributing to
the Improvement of the model which
changes really weakly gets better almost
all of it though handing more freedom
and responsibility to the children yeah
decentralized model though too and we
can get back to what that means on the
cost front so yeah okay so now kid goes
kids five goes to one of your classes
you said that there's there's some
formal learning taking place so with
regard to reading well but there's a lot
of play well so there's a lot of play uh
they're learning math on Khan Academy
once they can learn to read I mean so
they're they're learning to read and you
know really children when they want to
learn to read unless they're dyslexic
we'll learn to read and I'll get to how
we do that if they're dyslexic they need
a little extra training yeah but if you
just some children learn to read it four
and some learn delivery to seven I mean
it's just there's there's a span of when
they're ready you see the same on the
speaking yes you know and there's
actually you might think that the smart
kids learn to speak earlier and there's
actually no evidence for that so yeah
yeah kids can vary substantially in the
the date at which they pick up language
that the date at which they formulate
full sentences I wish you would talk to
some of our parents who are panicked
that their child isn't you know it's
like if you'll just be patient
the child will come yeah there's almost
no children that don't develop language
it's it's such a universal human so
they're around all these peers who are
helping them and it's multi-age so
remember you got older and younger and
they're mixing around and you can't
really tell who's the smartest or
because everyone's good at something but
the way we handle reading and I've
gotten criticism is you can start with
comic books or a magazine yeah and so
well let's make them read the classics
and I said if you make them read the
classics they will hate the classics but
what happens is but you can't have them
read something that's too difficult for
them right off you have to then there's
no reason not to use incremental move
forward let's read The Iliad at six it's
like okay but once they start reading
comic books and magazines then all of a
sudden you see them pick up Harry Potter
yeah and then by 11 or 12 summer reading
Democracy in America War and Peace now
if you read that or 11 and 12 you need
to read it at 21 31 41 right I mean but
they love to read as a group and so
reading becomes something that's just
what's your failure rate on the literacy
front excluding the dyslexic kids well
we could talk about zero zero zero zero
uh-huh it's zero and so what what are
your what's your criteria for for
evaluating literacy say by the age of
10. or hear about so um so so you you
read something uh you get a badge for
something called a deep book
you have to pitch the book as being you
know important rated by experts when
there's a whole criteria right so you
teach them how to select good books your
classmates have to agree that it's a
deep book and then if it is it goes on a
list so you can choose from the list or
you can pitch one that you like yeah but
these are all real books I mean they're
really they're books that would anybody
and so
you have to read that book
you have to tell why it impacted you and
whether you would recommend it to
someone else and that becomes a badge
that's probably like a six page thing
that you create
to try to pitch the book to someone else
right right and so how to make a case
how do we know that they're good is you
look at the badges now here's the thing
who approves that badge right no adults
in the room uh-huh well the answer is
um the standards of excellence are if
you've never done this before did you
put your heart into it yeah okay so
that's effort if you've done it once is
this time better than last time right
great if you've done it enough times
that it's hard to see the incremental
gain because you've kind of plateaued
let's compare it critique it to a Master
how is your story short story compared
to Hemingway right right right and if
you win some sort of contest in the
studio or an external contest it's
excellent
so
Dr Peterson signs off on my badge is
excellent now you're going to imagine
with human nature there's a little log
rolling that's going to go on right
we're buddies I'm going to prove yours
you're going to print mine but if you're
real buddies you're you're not going to
game the system so that the results are
no longer yeah but there are enough Free
Riders and so that starts to happen yeah
but there's an audit committee
so the audit committee will put out a
survey that's Anonymous every six weeks
and say whose badges should be audited
and you take those three because who
knows whose badges should be audited
right the people in the room know
and you don't embarrass those people how
do you stop that from turning into a
like an Informer festival and getting
Free Riders on that front well I'll get
back to kind of when you have toxic I
mean toxic sub drives and things so yeah
I can't but but generally the group is
One Tribe by this time and so you don't
really have that that's not really
tolerated by the group okay but so what
will happen is you know who who
volunteers for the audit committee
yeah well they're tough people right I
mean they're easy people don't want to
do the work so now you've got the
toughest judges
they'll take the three people that the
studio said should be audited and at
random choose three more
now no one knows whether you were chosen
at random or you were on the list kind
of everybody probably knows but then
we're going to do a deep audit of those
of those badges
if Jordan Peterson approved Jeff
sandifer's badge and it's rejected
then you lose a badge of the same value
so you just lost six weeks of work and
now all of your badges are going to be
audited
so we've had Learners
real strict real strict uh what would
you call it that's that's some that's
free writer control essentially so for
for those of you watching and listening
so the the population prevalence of dark
tetrad traits at a clinical level is
about four percent and so the dark
tetrat is Machiavellian narcissistic
Psychopathic and sadistic and that
cross-culturally that seems to be about
one person in 25 who's enough like that
to be a serious problem and they're
basically in the extreme there's
something like parasitic predators and
they'll game well-functioning systems to
attract credit to themselves with no
work and so you always see people think
that societies can just be set up on a
Cooperative basis and that you can just
assume the best about everyone and
that'll work but it and it does work 96
of the time but it really doesn't work
four percent of the time and that 4
percent is toxic enough to bring the
whole damn system crashing down so you
need to return Tit for Tat essentially
there has to be control mechanisms set
up in a well-functioning micro Society
so that the Free Rider narcissist types
can't get a toe hold and that takes a
certain amount of tough-mindedness yes
right often that's the often the sort of
thing that's lacking among
utopian-minded utopia-minded educational
reformers because they have a while we
don't need competition in our schools
for example it's all cooperation it's
like yeah that's fine until the free
writers come along and then it's not
fine at all you need Justice and mercy
right because they're both yeah and so
and so if you think about it
warm-hearted tough-minded the 360s
that's what we're measuring and
encouraging and giving people but you
need this system of auditing well that's
interesting that that you use both
warm-hearted and tough-minded eh because
that's reflection of a trait on the
agreeable Dimension and agreeable people
are compassionate and polite they're
maternal that that's really the right
way of thinking about it the kind of
maternal that would be properly devoted
to a very dependent infant and so
there's something lovely about that
right as lovely as maternal love but on
the other end which is the more
masculine and
there's more let's keep the Free Riders
at Bay and then let's also only reward
actual attainment right and there's love
in that too but it's more like it's the
love of of
discipline and encouragement well and
those of us that are tough-minded I'm
tough-minded disagreeable need to learn
when to be warm-hearted yeah the ones
that are too warm-hearted need to learn
for their own good when to draw
boundaries and so that's what develops
and all this now by the way we do see
for us it's about one out of a hundred
we see someone we see highly toxic
children come in I can't explain why I'm
just telling you their behavior I'm not
saying they're damned or they're doomed
yeah yeah because you can always
actually be asked to leave the community
and come back you can repent yeah but
you see every once in a while now
there's also often a strong correlation
to the family or not listen but
sometimes not you know but that's the
only time an adult will step in if they
see that happening and what markers do
you have for that
they're telling very small lies just
like the Dragon book right you just can
catch them because otherwise the system
will correct but the system can't take
someone who's smart enough to parse this
you know you're always staying right
inside the lines
right and so over time the tribe will
learn even the young ones to recognize
that but when you're fresh and new yeah
and so what what an owner that's why
Psychopaths like in the real world
psychopaths are itinerant
because they can't stay longer well they
can't stay because people figure out
their games and and then they stop them
and I you know one of the problems with
the virtual world right now is that it
allows the Psychopaths to be
continually itinerant which is
essentially what you are if you're
anonymous right is that nobody can get a
handle on you you can't track the
reputation and you know the people who
promote the benefits of online anonymity
say well what about the heroic
whistleblowers and it's like fair enough
but they're one percent right yeah
the heroic whistleblowers but what about
the enabled Psychopaths well
the whistleblowing is worth the
psychopathy it's like yeah it doesn't
look like it's interesting because the
group gets pretty good even in early
Asia recognizing it but the first time
they see it it's like when you've said
before about a dark Triad or a dark
quadrant um male can take advantage of a
young female yeah the females will learn
yeah yeah well eight-year-olds learn too
yeah yeah but but we will we will step
in and say Here's a transition contract
if these things don't happen you're
going to need to leave and reapply so we
will pick out but it's one out of a
hundred yeah we'll see someone who's and
so so we're probably drawing you know
from some segment that's slightly
healthier because they won't apply maybe
but about one
with kids
so there's pretty good literature on
this
if you group two-year-olds together and
watch them interact about four percent
of the males it's almost none of the
females yeah about four percent of the
males at age two will kick hit bite and
steal
okay so that's not very many that's
three percent of the populations one in
fifty so it's not much different from
but but most of those kids
despite their temperamental proclivity
to be aggressive are socialized by the
age of four almost all of them
someone has to socialize yeah maybe help
them either control that aggression or
integrate it better to integrate it the
the kids who don't have that integrated
by the age of four they're in for a
pretty dismal ride yeah there isn't a
lot of clinical evidence suggesting that
if those traits are still in place at
the age of four that they can be
ameliorated at that point yeah and so
and those are the kids that turn into
bullies and delinquents and we see
something very similar that and I wanted
to ask you because we see something else
and I'm curious what the literature says
about this
it appears to us that that the tribe in
these systems and this took villain in
society will shape conscientiousness
until about 13. yeah and and so so there
are some people that are naturally
conscientious yeah and there are others
it seems to shape our experience is when
we take someone after the age of 13 if
the culture is spun up they will behave
in a conscientious way
but without the culture they will
regress back to where they are well part
of what happens at 13 okay so imagine
you have these aggressive kids yeah okay
at four now they maintain a high level
of aggressive behavior okay now at about
14 the boys join them under the
influence of testosterone and so and
then for for the for the normal boys who
have this spike in aggression that
decline start to decline pretty rapidly
around 18 and then and then goes back
down to where you'd expect it if you
just tracked it linearly
um
whereas the criminal types don't desist
what happens with the criminal types
generally speaking is that they start to
desist in their late 20s and so the the
fundamental
hard-headed penological theory for
repeat offenders
you know one percent of the criminals
right costs
so for re for True repeat offenders is
you just keep them in jail till they're
30. right and then it might be delayed
maturation something like that you know
but after that they're not as big a
threat yeah yeah they they start being
so so incentivized by the way the thing
we see over and over and over again and
I can't stress this enough and I think
it's my theory of why the United States
works is the 80 20 rule is one of the
most powerful rules of prayer and so
what you see is if you believe every
child's a genius yeah you find the child
that's good at all these each of these
different things but they all have a
place yeah just like I can be a plumber
or an airline pilot but you see that in
these societies as they grow you got to
find your place in the so the Pareto
this 80 20 rule this is
um 20 of your customers produce 80 of
your sales 20 of the recording artists
sell 80 of the records 20 of the authors
sell 80 of the books the actual rule is
the square root of the number of people
doing a particular task perform half the
labor and so this drives inequality in
every creative domain but your point is
there's a diverse enough range of
potential Pareto contributions it
doesn't matter right like you can be an
off the chart plumber and I can be an
off the chart mathematician and there's
zero trouble if we're only going to
measure how quickly I can memorize
things for a test I'll never use again
and it's basically IQ then there's only
going to be one winner of that or one
group of winners yeah in this case
there's all sorts of ways you can win
and it's so complicated you can't even
keep track yeah but what you can keep
track of are these stories that are
repeated over and over and over again
about heroes don't win when they get
knocked down they get back up yeah and
it becomes kind of a resilience a
resilience a hey it's a challenge yeah
we talk about I may have gotten this
from you like what are the three
monsters The Three Monsters Are
resistance
distraction and victimhood it's like if
I can't which one of those is standing
in my way right resistance I just need
to take the first step right yeah and
that might just be apprehension of sheer
complexity right but what do you do take
a step okay distraction and if you can't
then take a smaller step exactly I mean
take one more step towards the elevator
yeah
um and so distraction it's what's
valuable to you in Focus I mean yeah
prioritizing Focus right right if it's
victimhood
then gratitude is the only substitute
for is the only Elixir and so they
learned that yes and we should we should
also point out in that regard that that
gratitude isn't the naive insistence
that the world is a perfectly delightful
place and that everything is going to go
well gratitude is a practice it's a
moral virtue and the the The Virtuous
part of it is the courage to find and
even the darkest Place some light that
can guide you through right and the
willingness to do that the understanding
that that's a practice I mean when my
wife my wife was extraordinarily ill a
few years ago like fatally ill so the
story went and one of the things she did
that was of Aid to her physically
because it helped her be less stressed
and that's good on the immunological
front but Also spiritually let's say was
to
strive very diligently to look for what
she could be grateful for
in each day and even in each moment and
in her situation I think this is very
often the case for people who are facing
very serious illness she was grateful
for the love and support of her family
and her friends and and and that was
also genuine and also of genuine aid but
it is a it's a courageous practice it's
not a kind of naivety and so if you're
surrounded by a group that understands
if you're playing the part of the victim
they don't say don't be a victim they
begin to ask you questions about
gratitude and give you space right
sometimes you want to play the victim
for a while yeah well sometimes terrible
things are happening right right
sometimes yeah your life's just and so
then you get someone who's actually you
know I'm very empathetic that that's
happening I'm sympathetic to you that
that's happening but then the answer is
once you're finished with that yeah what
are we going to get up and go do right
that's good for you right and we're
going to have this moment so just
imagine all these young people and by
the way the high schoolers are going up
and down to the Middle School in
elementary all the time the middle
schoolers are going up and down you'll
see Elementary so this is a family this
is like a neighborhood of young people
moving around between Studios helping
each other often you'll get a 10 year
old that's better at calculus
you know than a high schooler right and
they're up and it has to always for the
10 year old he gets to share his
knowledge with with older kids that's
what we have 10 year olds that actually
sell tutoring services so they have to
be Socratic they can't lecture yeah but
but anyway but that's the beauty is
they're learning how to build a society
they're learning self-management yeah
they're learning self-governance they're
learning how to treat other human beings
yeah and guess what the learning's
exploding oh and by the way they've had
six or seven apprenticeships in the
world by the time they're in high school
yeah and how do you set those up and
what do what do the apprenticeships look
like it's the easiest and best thing we
do
you go through a series of challenges of
what you might want to do with your life
even 11 or 12. like what's exciting I
want to be a vet yeah I want to be so
then you learn how to go find out the
owner of the vet service what have they
done in their life that's valuable then
you write an email
that says Mr Smith I've so admired your
compassion with animals I know that you
won this award it has to be genuine
right right would you show you've done
your homework but then the question is I
I'm looking for this apprenticeship I'm
not asking you for it I'm just asking
can I have a five minute phone call to
explain it right it's all I want yeah so
you get the phone call
you listen for objections and try to
answer them right yeah and only ask then
is can I have two minutes in person you
show up in person and you imagine this
12 year old is showed up ready
and they say Dr Peterson
would you give me a chance yeah I'll
show up early yeah work late yeah I'll
wash the floors I'll do whatever you ask
yeah yeah if I don't ever do one of
those things not only can you fire me
immediately but it's going to reflect on
all my studio mates they're going to
find out but if you'll give me a chance
I'll prove myself yeah it's an
irresistible success rate on that is
like 98 now so what no that's
interesting in and of itself you know
because we're we're constantly bombarded
with this insistence especially from the
radical left that the reason that you
might employ someone is to skim off
their excess labor right the Marxist
theory of of Labor and that you're it's
basically an exploitative relationship
and you can be cynical about this he
said well no kidding the businessmen are
going to agree because now they've got
free labor but that isn't what happens
like what happens is that and you have
to be unbelievably cynically cynical and
blind and believe that the world is
motivated by power to believe anything
other than this is that the the ability
to
act as
parent uh
proxy is there in all of us to the
degree we can be parents and it's
extraordinarily attractive to offer
people the opportunity to establish a
relationship with someone who's Young
where they're fostering their
development I think that's a primary
source of human gratification I actually
think there's also something that's I
wouldn't call it cynical but it's a
little more self-interested that the
people who are being like very generous
because this is you know it's hard to
have an apprentice yeah yeah but I
actually we've seen this happen at the
Acton MBA I I think it's
they're looking up to you as The Wizard
of Oz and you're seeing in them a young
new right and there's this sense of that
reminds me myself yeah and you know and
that's the best part of myself the best
part of myself and in fact if I had had
this at that age right and so I'm so
attracted to this
but but anyway through this process what
do you learn how to do you learn how to
find something to do that matters in
your life serving someone else and by
the time you also learn how to ask
someone
you learn how to suggest in an
attractive manner to someone how they
might offer you an opportunity this is
one of the reasons it's so useful to
teach your child
uh to help your child develop extremely
polished manners yeah and because what
happens if you have well-mannered kids
who say please and thank you and who
know how to shake hands and introduce
themselves and who are sensible enough
to listen to an adult then they will
charm the adults
and not an instrumental way a
manipulative way but they'll charm the
adults and the adults will reveal the
best part of them and then they'll offer
the kids all sorts of opportunities and
so what a deal that is for your kids and
we see they just happen over and over
and what do we have to do
nothing we don't set these up we don't
match right right the young people go
out and do it all with parental
permission and with you know the parents
have to sign off it's safe but they're
out there doing you know our boys
um went through amazing they ended up
their their final apprenticeships were
SpaceX right and you know what we they
did that on their own I mean well that's
great too because that makes it their
accomplishment oh that's another thing
that's so useful about not doing too
much for other people isn't it so one of
the things that as a therapist it's very
easy
to steal your clients success and to
Slough off their risk so for example if
you come to me and say well do you have
some advice on the career front and I
say well this is what I think you should
do and this is how I think you should do
it and you go out and you do it it's
like it's not obvious at all whose
victory that is right right and then if
you go out and fail well
I failed as a therapist but not as much
as you've felt so it's like your skin
I'm gonna claim the victories and and
stuff off the failures yeah well this is
why by the way we don't ever talk about
the success of our graduates because
it's their success you just want to hear
us talk about that I mean we just don't
it's their success not ours to claim and
it also brings up the hardest thing we
have it's not the young people it's the
parents
and you know I I asked our son the other
day a good friend was working on
something about fatherhood and I asked
our youngest son Sam
um you know this whole fatherhood thing
you would understand it better than I
have because you're the customer right
you're the person so what advice would
you give my friend about fatherhood
and he said you know when you're younger
you just want your parents around and to
pay attention to you yeah you know not
coddle you not but just to be there and
he said but once you get into kind of
Middle School
you're really around your peers and your
parents their job then is to be a good
role model and he said and this is what
chilled me he said so to be a good
father all you can do is work on
yourself yeah and that's why it's so
hard yeah and I stopped and I'm like oh
my gosh have I worked on myself and you
know but it was just like this is from
from a 19 year old it's like as a father
I need to love my child and work on
myself yeah and that's the way the child
will be healthy the reason that when we
have a problem is generally the parent
you know over parenting or wanting to
intervene for the child yeah and they're
they're prohibited by contract from
doing that they sign a contract says I
won't do that and then they'll do it
anyway right right and so it's very hard
for parents to let go of it is hard
that's their habit it is hard I mean and
there is a narcissism in that too
because then the parent gets to take
credit for the child's success right and
to trumpet that and yes and that's well
that's that whole edible mother
nightmare that Freud outlined so
brilliantly so long ago it's like and
it's it's hard if you're a caregiver you
know again to give the devil is due yeah
and I think it's probably harder for
women because they have to give their
all to their infants in a
self-sacrificing manner yes because
infants require full dedicated
this isn't about me care
the problem is so the psychoanalyst said
the good mother necessarily fails and
what they meant by that was the woman is
faced with this terrible necessity of
dispensing with that full-fledged
maternal care incrementally and letting
the child facilitating the child's
movement forward and I think it's very
useful for a woman to have her masculine
side developed for that or to have more
more likely to have a male partner
around who's more oriented towards
encouragement than than let's say that
intense maternal care but but um it's
definitely the case that you want to
Foster in your children and in the
people you're mentoring that ability to
do things on their own there's a rule of
thumb for care of elderly people it's a
very good one
um never do anything for the person
you're caring for they can do themselves
right and that's a that's that's because
I want them to keep keep doing
everything they can yeah you don't want
well and you want them to retain their
dignity and
steal from that
what is
what they have left and you want to
encourage their autonomy
if for no other reason then then you're
not going to be overburdened with having
to do everything right right so and that
well okay so let's uh
two questions here one is
how do you develop that Community ethos
that orients the entire Community to
regulate the the behavior of the members
in a positive manner how do you how do
you how do you how do you bring that
about you're continuing to play game
after game after game with different
kinds of motivational systems so
sometimes it's the hero's journey and
more of a you know Maslow's hierarchy
kind of feeling or a onion feeling
sometimes it's uh being rewarded with
extrinsic rewards sometimes those are
Squad based sometimes they're individual
sometimes the whole studio sometimes
they're awesome you're just playing game
after game after game so it's an
aggregation of playable games it's a lot
of experiments going on within a rubric
that you know is rewarding this feedback
um and collapses and then part of it is
it's hard because the studio will
completely collapse
and as an adult you want to step in and
fix it right and so we say Okay step
back yeah take a deep breath leave it
alone okay collapse in what way
um there's two clicks and they're
arguing about something and the
civility's broken down and you know
social fragmentation or or Excellence
you know the people have kind of gotten
uh blase about Excellence or I saw
something interesting in our high school
and our launch pad
um they had built such a complex cool
society that the and you know this from
having your own companies you know if
you're not careful you build up so many
rules that your company becomes a
bureaucracy yeah so they were getting to
that stagehold it was a beautiful
society and they looked at it and they
said
we're going to do away with all but
three rules and if we want to put a rule
back the first thing we're going to do
is ask the person the rules being
instituted for why do you not want to be
here because you know right so we're not
going to put a rule for the edge case
we're going to deal with the individual
and try to listen to them and maybe they
need to leave for a while or maybe we
need to help them or and so you just see
these complex set and simple and complex
set of experiments and they're learning
by doing and watching and so when you
either get you know a tyrannical
situation or Lord of the Flies going on
you step back once and then it always
gets worse you step back again yeah and
here's the magic that happens
at that point
three or four of The Sheepdogs what we
call them because they're the ones that
get the wolves we'll come to you and say
we don't want to live like this anymore
and then you say socratically
well do you think you would like to try
a pure democracy or a Democratic
Republic
they might not even know at age eight
what that is yeah but they have the
internet then go figure it out yeah yeah
and they'll come back and have a town
council meeting and vote on a new
structure we had one time we were we
were actually right so so you so now
they have a problem with governance and
now they have the motivation to find out
what good governance means so so we got
actually ejected as a guide I got
ejected from the studio because I they
didn't want me in there anymore so for a
week there'll be a week go by and no
adult goes in our Middle School it runs
itself so I was actually kind of asked
to leave so I left I thought well we'll
see what they do with it yeah the studio
broke down
I didn't really know what was going on
inside
um I came back after about 10 days I was
invited back because they couldn't
create as good a learning challenges the
games they were creating weirdest Goods
they wanted some more games
when I came back in they had taken
masking tape
and they had divided the studio into
like eight city-states because they've
been reading about city-states each
city-state had a different governance
system and people were voting with their
feet where to where to reside oh yeah
that kept going for about six months it
turned out to be an incredibly powerful
way to organize the studio and then at
some point that the competition between
it's a competition between the
invitations you know I've been thinking
about this on the religious front
talking to as I probably have talked
about this most particularly with some
of the more fundamentalist Muslims that
I've talked to that the the notion of
holy war Jihad
William James said 150 years ago that we
needed a moral equivalent to war right
something as difficult and challenging
but oriented towards the uppermost good
let's say
and I was thinking about the religious
competition as
a competition between invitations
and so the idea would be and this is
sort of like the idea that as an adult
you're a role model for your teenagers
like all right so you've got this set of
principles on the Islamic side let's say
are you such a shining example of those
principles in practice that people look
at you and think man I'd like to abide
by that
by that code and that seems right to me
is that
a competition of invitations first of
all it has the advantage of competition
it's like well there's a bunch and
that's and that's experimentation
essentially right and it can be intense
competition but if it's Invitational
then people get to use freedom of
conscience and free of Association to
choose and that seems to give us the
best of both Best of Both Worlds so how
did you manage to motivate yourself to
stay the hell out of it when when things
were well it's where I was lucky that
having you know been in Harvard Business
School and been among the best Socratic
teachers in the world having practiced
Socratic teaching and we had all these
Hotshot entrepreneurs that came to teach
with us at the MBA level
but you had to help and work with them
and yourself to keep your ego out of it
so you know if you're teaching a case
and you're I mean all of our teachers
were very exceptionally successful
entrepreneurs you want to step in and
give the answer right yeah but that was
faster but but that was forbidden I mean
like you would get ejected from the
teaching Corps for doing that and so
we all agreed to live by a contract and
we had micro routines we would execute
just like in the studio there's all
these micro routines layered upon each
other yeah and so I was just equipped I
mean I want to give an answer as much as
anybody else in the world and I do
sometimes I shouldn't yeah but I'm
equipped to say it's so much more
powerful to say yeah would you do a or b
next well you know for for the men that
are listening this is a useful thing to
know about your wives I mean it's true
in interpersonal Communication in
general but you know your wife is going
to sit down with you and lay out her
complaints about whatever happens to be
happening and you might think that you
know what to do about that and you might
think that what she wants is for you to
do something about it and to provide an
answer now
that also might be your impatience
because you want to just get to the cut
to the Chase and solve the damn problem
and so it's not all moral virtue on your
side that you actually know what to do
but what you have to understand is that
when someone's first walking through a
problem set
part of what they're trying to do is to
figure out what the problem is and so
unless you let them lay out the problem
landscape without interference you you
don't even know that the problem you're
solving is the correct problem and so
and that you you definitely see this in
the psychotherapeutic relationship all
the time is that
man once you've got the problem properly
identified you're 90 of the way to
solving it but that wandering around to
begin with yeah and the Socratic method
is very useful for that it also helps
people build well to investigate their
doubts thoroughly but also to build the
analytic skills necessary to to assess a
problem properly and to start to
strategize I remember Laura was in um a
discussion with one of our top acting
MBA teachers one time we were in a case
discussion
and he's a wonderful guy named Stephen
Thompson he stopped her in mid-sentence
and he said
ask yourself at this moment would you
rather be right or would you ever rather
be curious right right and it changed a
lot I mean she's also she's always been
a curious person she was like oh I was
trying to be right at this moment yeah
and so it's those kind of Revelations
yeah that's like well that's true that's
that's the that's the pharaonic
temptation as in Pharaoh is to be right
now
a good way around that I think
metacognitively is to think okay
are there more things you know or more
things that you don't know now anyone
with any sense knows that no matter how
thick the book they've read you know in
total is the book of things they haven't
read or encountered is way thicker yeah
and so then the next question is
well would you rather be friends with
what you know or friends with what you
don't know and that's an infinite
landscape and so if you can learn to be
the friend of what you don't know then
and and you're really afraid about that
it's like no no I I need to know here I
might be wrong in my presumption of
being right and then it it opens up I
think that's part of what opens up the
underlying motivation for True Socratic
questioning if I'm if I'm talking to my
wife
I actually want to know you know even
though part of me doesn't why she thinks
what I'm doing isn't working because
it's possible that if I could listen
carefully enough I could find out
something
stupid that I'm doing and quit doing it
and I would rather stop doing stupid
things because life's hard enough
without
putting up unnecessary obstacles now
imagine these kinds of discussions going
on they happen for there's a 15-minute
Socratic launch in the morning there's a
15-minute launch after launch there's a
15 minute close so you're having these
young people are having on a detailed
moral problem of real relevance to them
these Socratic discussions over and over
and over again every day and then so
what would a discussion like like that
look like what kind of topic might come
up uh it might be we're having an issue
uh with Clicks in the studio
um and so there would be something about
what is a click and how to clicks form
right and the question might do it's
implied well actually actually what we
would ask you is uh we would say what's
the biggest issue in the studio right
now is it intentionality is it civility
is it excellence
um right right projectization and
whichever one they picked it would be
okay okay what should we do about this
should we set smart goals should we run
a 360 survey should we and then after a
very short while they're leading these
discussions right what should we do and
why it's always relevant there's
probably a hero story in fact you know
the way we we do civilization I've
talked with Larry arnott Hillsdale about
this
you'll be in a group of five
ten-year-olds
and you get a question to go research
and the question might be
was John F Kennedy
the nerdy will son of a rich man or
America's greatest president
assassinated in his prime
now 10 year olds have no idea who John F
Kennedy is right right
but he was assassinated he was a richer
that's pretty cool yeah right so they'll
go spend 30 minutes researching or an
hour researching all about Kennedy yeah
then they'll come back and they'll start
debating that and before they're done
it'll be like well what does make a
great president yeah and what is your
Prime and what is no adult these deep
rich and by the way after that you never
forget who John Kennedy was or the Cuban
Missile Crisis but all it takes is one
question and the right Rules of
Engagement yeah and you can back away
yeah well that's also how you can set up
critical thinking as a as a really
motivating game so in my in my fourth
year seminar
we would go through scientific papers
one by one I I would pick the papers
classic scientific papers and then I
would extract out some of the core
questions and then I divided this was
fun I divided the groups my students
there's about 20 into groups of four and
I put the introverts in one group in the
extroverts another and the reason was is
that introverts will talk but they're
threshold for speaking is higher and the
lag time is longer so if you have an
extroverted with a bunch of introverts
yeah yeah because they're they're they
they they're more likely to interrupt
earlier so I'd put the introverts
together so that was fun and I would
assign
aside of the question arbitrarily and
the rule was look I don't really care
what your opinion is about this issue
not because I don't care about your
opinion but because
it's worthwhile to explore the entire
problem set and it's very worthwhile to
learn to think critically and to think
critically after take opposing sides and
so the students would have this
discussion and then the rest of them
would vote on the outcome and it was
extraordinarily engaging and the
students really liked it and they would
spend in-class time doing the
investigation right then and there right
without you having to do anything right
I mean yeah yeah well we did the same
with the Revolutionary War you know you
had the Tories you have the Patriots and
then you had this group in between it
was about a third or third and a third
and then it's like the two sides the
Tories and the Patriots have to argue
and the people in the middle are going
to vote with their feet and you're going
to see who won so there's all sorts of
just experiment after experiment after
experiment right and so that oh yeah
okay so that's that's what pageo my my
friend I have a friend who's a very
religious thinker and he
he um he's developed model of governance
that's very much like that that's
extracted out of the Exodus story has to
do with uh the distribution of response
imagine there's tyranny and chaos and so
that'd be tyranny and slavery let's say
and then there's a model of good
governance that is the alternative to
both of those and it's something like
distributed responsibility and something
like this idea of nested games so in in
the subsidiary organization
an individual has responsibility for
himself and then paired individuals have
responsibility for their family and
impaired families have responsibility
for the community and then paired
communities have responsibility for the
state and there's there's games going on
at every level that are well they should
be games that are Guided by the spirit
of the logos fundamentally but it should
be distributed at every single level and
that's the opposite of a totalitarian
system so instead like in a totalitarian
system every single person lies about
everything all the time and in a
well-governed system the opposite of the
LIE isn't the truth it's more like it's
more like something like uh The Humble
approach to expanding knowledge it's an
experiment or something it's a way of
generating new knowledge well so think
about the individual the squad
the 36 person people in a cohort and
then the whole campus yeah and then you
have people that are also doing you know
they're specializing in chemistry versus
method and so you've got all these mixes
like that going on all the time right
and out of that comes a culture right
and also because you have that diverse
range of options so the the answer to
the problem of inequality isn't equality
the answer to the problem of inequality
is a diverse enough game so that the
that the distribution of inequality is
normal right so like you said you can be
a good plumber you can be a good
abstract mathematician it doesn't matter
they're both they're both
they're both infinitely playable games
and they're infinitely expandable well
and the question that it keeps getting
asked over and over again so one of the
other things that you go do is they go
do what are called stars and Stepping
Stones interviews where you'll find
people you admire who are between if
those saying you're in high school your
age and 25 25 and 40 and then you know
over the age of 60s there's a there's a
range and you'll go and what we found by
doing thousands of those is at the age
of 60 most people ask the same three
questions they phrase them differently
but it is
did I contribute something meaningful
was I a good person
and who did I love and who loved me
those three questions even at age eight
are always on the table
I see them again so did I contribute
something meaningful right so meaningful
specific meaningful was I a good person
who did I love and who loved me right
right now what I bring that up because
we could pick I mean you and I could
prioritize those differently and both
win the game right right I mean so
you're always asking and by the way
those questions mean something different
was I a good person means kind of black
and white moral choice it 11 or maybe
even 15. it probably around your 20s 30s
or 40s it's about am I becoming who I
was meant to become I mean good has a
different meaning right slightly
different right right it's not so much
abiding by the appropriate rules but but
while we keep offering these moral
choices that allow you to kind of
self-rank in different ways it's not
only aptitudes it's also what's
important in life because you've got to
ask what's success it's not how much
money you make yeah making money is
great but that's not the ultimate
measure was it being how kind you are
making money is great if it facilitates
the other things that you just described
right right it provides you with an
expanded Horizon of opportunity it's not
so great if it enables your hedonistic
impulsivity in fact it could just kill
you right I had lots of clients who were
fine when they were broke yeah but the
second one client in particular he used
to get his unemployment check he was
disabled
at workplace injury and he was he was a
pretty simple person and he was easily
exploited by Psychopaths and those were
his friends and what would happen to him
is he'd get his unemployment check you
know once a month and so he'd have lots
of money
for three days and it was off to the bar
and and nose deep and cocaine and face
down in a ditch and all his terrible
parasitical friends would gather around
him until his bones were plucked dry
eventually that killed him wow yeah yeah
and so money
money is an enabler but it's also an
enabler of Vice so so be careful right
right be careful with money so yeah okay
so let's maybe we should turn
okay let's do something practical First
if people are interested in these actin
schools yes where can they find more
information sure uh actin like a c t o n
Academy dot org is that is where the
schools are featured uh there's also
something fascinating we do if you want
to take a mini step it's called the
children's business Fair where children
will come and for one day pitch a
business they'll have a business where
they sell things oh yeah
um we will have this year one thousand
of those fairs across the United States
and across the world
and we'll serve about 50 000 young
people and all you have to do if you
want to start one of those that's kind
of a stepping stone to an actin yeah is
put out seven tables in your front yard
and have your kids tell their friends
and we have a whole system that we pay
for everything we provide uh we provide
prize money just as a it's just the
thing our family wants to do and so and
where can they people find information
about children's business fair just
Google that or children's
businessfair.org there's a two-minute
video it shows how you can start one in
your backyard or actingacademy.org if
people are interested in the school okay
okay well we'll make sure we put those
links in the description now we've we
haven't talked at all about higher
education maybe we should we should okay
diverge into that momentarily
um
so we could talk about my uh
Misadventures and reform uh under
Governor Perry Texas governor Perry I
think we'll I think I'll leave those for
something more positive and just talk
about what are we seeing from our super
competent high schoolers who we call
launch patterns because they're
launching out in the world
and what we're seeing increasingly is a
belief that many colleges are about
prestige and what they're about is
competence yeah and so of course if you
get a free ride to MIT and you're a
gifted engineer you go to MIT yeah right
I mean of course you would do that yeah
um so would you pay 400 So Far So Far
right right I know that could all change
yeah
um if you're you know from from uh well
no matter who you are should you pay 400
000 from a no-name degree that won't get
you a job from a place no one's ever
heard of no that's a terrible idea so
we're seeing that with all of these
apprenticeships our launch patterns are
coming out and they can get into
whatever competitive College their
scores are high enough to get into yeah
but about four out of ten are going
directly into industry and maybe hacking
a degree somewhere on the side but
they've realized so I think we're seeing
our best and brightest begin to vote
with their feet yeah and begin to think
of college as a tool that may or may not
be necessary I think that's more true of
the boys
no nothing it's pretty equally true now
I will say
um
there is something to be said for
college if you want to go to football
games uh paint your face be in a tribe
chase girls or guys yeah yeah right
that's kind of what college has left
yeah
there's nothing bad about that we should
also again give the devil is due I mean
I've been trying to sort out why people
will pay let's say two hundred thousand
dollars for a four-year degree and
here's a couple of reasons is you get
away from your parents you have a
transition point you establish a new
group of peers and maybe you find a mate
right especially the last one right if
if that's your two hundred thousand
dollar investment and you're you're you
you have pooled around you eligible
young people of a certain degree of
let's say intellectual capability and
discipline somewhat selected that's not
such a bad deal that's not exactly the
fundamental purpose of an educational
institution but it's not trivial and
it's not easy no and I think that's why
it's I think this is why that's why the
games continue to go yes so we're gonna
have to find a way to replace that
um or it's going to continue to be in
essence a very expensive country club
right yeah I mean it's a very expensive
country club now it's a very big
expensive country cult yes so and that's
that and that's definitely a program and
I and I think my you know my friends
that are in higher ed and that are
thoughtful have seen this coming the
other the other issue that higher ed
faces is as you well know they make all
their money on the freshmen and
sophomores teaching them with adjuncts
yes right and so
then you then the the upper division
courses are very expensive taught by
tenure faculty right but it's the
internet that's threatening it's all the
you know it's all the the distance
learning is threatening the freshman and
sophomore group but if they lose enough
of that group or have to Discount then
the whole model Turns Upside Down and
higher ed has no way to cut costs yeah
they can't because they can't cut costs
Also let's talk about costs so yes we
were talking last night you said in in
Austin yeah it's 32 000 a year per
student that's the public education cost
right for K-12 but that that's also a
that's an underestimate so yeah yeah so
my my belief in what I've seen is that
doesn't include all the facility cost
properly accounted for right so so the
number somewhere north of 32 000 uh last
Saw and and you know that right that
ranges from 20 000 around the country to
much more than that
um and you were gonna ask I think you
were saying cost at action Academy
um you know we've got some incredibly
successful campuses that now are running
looking at anywhere from a thousand
dollars per student per year
to maybe twenty five hundred dollars per
student per year now we have some that
have tuition as high as 35 000 a year so
it varies yeah yeah but we're managing
by the fact these young people are so
super capable on their own we're
managing to create Alternatives that um
deliver an extraordinary both academic
right so that's five percent of the cost
fundamentally well and we should let's
delve into those numbers a little bit I
mean a pretty decent teacher's salary is
sixty thousand dollars I don't think
that's unfair right okay so that means
if that means each two students could in
principle hire a teacher just for them
now maybe you could double that if you
had to include the cost of a building
because generally uh the infrastructure
costs in the typical organization are
about
about equivalent to the Staffing costs
if you need a rule of thumb and so that
means that in principle
what the education system is spending
now would allow each group of four
students to hire a full-time teacher yes
right and so this is not an efficient
system obviously well if you look at the
head count
um and this is true for all of your
shoes by the way not just public
education but it's about a five to one
adult to learner
um to student ratio
now it's not it's not five to one per
teacher but there's so many admin people
five to one five students yeah there's
five there's there's one adult for every
five students right right that's that's
the that's right across and and our rate
is more like one adult for every 20 to
30 to 40 right to 50 students right and
you're and that's so interesting too eh
because one of the claims that's
constantly put forward by teachers
unions in particular is that well the
only thing that really matters in
education is teachers of student ratio
right there should be more like there
shouldn't be more than 10 students per
teacher right and you can understand
that to some degree if you believe that
teacher attention to a given student is
a marker for academic movement forward
but your model is more the idea that no
if the institution is well constituted
then you produce maximal autonomy on the
part of the participants and the and
well they pick up the work they do the
learning that goes along with picking up
the work right well and the thing I say
is fundamental is
education is not the same as learning
education is something you do to someone
you educate them now you self-educate
but if you're educating someone learning
is what the person experience like the
delivery of a product right and so
knowledge I want to be careful here
because our model is just one model
there's going to be 50 fun models and
interesting models come out for for
learning uh as the world changes and you
know my my great grandfather was
president of the University he's buried
on their campus I mean I came from a my
wife's uh mother uh Joanna was one of
the incredible teachers uh in Oklahoma
City in fact the quick story that's
worth telling about that we're having
one of these exhibitions I talked about
and this woman comes up to me and we're
in Austin Texas and she comes up and she
said
you know this reminds me
of my eighth grade science teacher and
she said I live in Oklahoma City I came
to see this and it reminds me of her and
she started describing this wonderful
teacher who was Socratic and who did all
the things and she said um she got
finished and I said and her name was
Joanna Anderson oh and the lady said how
in the world could you have known that
and I said because that's her daughter
Laura and the woman just started crying
and she said that lady changed my life
so adults have an important role to play
in a child's life yeah
that role shouldn't be to be an
authoritarian
you know having order to sit at the desk
where a bell rings every 45 minutes yeah
that's not the teacher's fault that's
the system right it's the system now
you're participating in the system yeah
but I always try to you know I try to
divide the teachers are often the heroes
and sometimes not
the system's the problem and I don't
think there's anyone who doesn't think
the system is broken they're going to be
a lot of different recipes we've got a
recipe that happens to be very low cost
and seems to be powerful and it's a
working also scalable and scalable we
have one employee frequently and and our
whole network our staff is one what one
employee for 300 campuses
because how do you facilitate
communication between the campuses and
exchange let's say best practices uh
there's a forum where people are
exchanging since we've been sitting here
we've probably gotten four new
experiments on the Forum when I get off
I'll read them oh yeah so people are in
so there's a way it's like Legos there's
a way to share experiments yeah yeah and
there's a way to report on them there's
a central place it's almost like Unix
code to store and we've been very
careful how the modules fit together so
they're defined so you can swap out
modules and so people are running all
right you have you have areas that
you're we just touched upon this a
little bit last night you have domains
is that the right way of thinking about
them like domains of of learning how do
you structure the yeah so you would
think about the typical Reading Writing
math I mean there's ways to do that but
what we have are these six-week quests
and you might do for biology the medical
Quest we talked about where you're
diagnosing disease we have a great Quest
on living will and dying will that's all
that death and so those quests last for
six weeks they're integrative and
they'll teach you something about life
personal finance biology but applied
chemistry things you're going to really
do and then you have genres which are
much like your essay product except
they're different recipes for writing a
white paper a poem and so you're
actually practicing something you're
going to write and use in the real world
and display in front of an audience uh
it might be a speech so those chunks are
well defined and you could create one I
could create one we can present it to
the crowd
and the crowd votes them up right and
then that's shared among the group and
it becomes the standard until something
replaces it right how do you stop or how
how have you dealt with the problem of
ideological capture let's say on
whatever side of the political space
well I I think we're we're agnostic I
mean we have a series of promises like
like we believe that
um economic freedom religious freedom
and political Freedom you know are are
one of our core beliefs right so that's
non-negotiable right so that's not
negotiable so there's a series of things
like that we believe every child is a
genius who's you know who it's destined
to change the world so there are a set
of those you agree to
and everything else is up for fair
debate if you can make a and we've had
right so you have a limited number of
committed Communists you know in my
group of high schoolers
they would debate why Marx was right and
it's fascinating to listen to him in
fact there were times I was like that's
a pretty dagged dumb good point I'm a
committed capitalist who's like you know
that's Market Fair that's an interest so
everything's Up For Debate nothing is up
for not saying something about the truth
and it's all to be tested so there is no
ideological capture from the left or
right
when you have to actually test things in
the real world and debate them and can
you be wrong of course you can and has
has the the spread of let's say woke
culture to to use a somewhat awkward
phrase has that produced a challenge to
the operation of your institutions or
are people just sidestepping that
problem altogether within the confines
of your organization well so so if if if
you came from
um
let's see let's say you came from one of
the protected woke classes that people
talk about
if you want to be gay
that's I mean that's I'm going to be
tolerant of that that's not I mean I
mean that's your choice right I'm not
gonna now we could talk about the
impacts that's going to have or what
does that means but it's just an honest
conversation and so right well those you
know people who are different in their
proclivity uh yeah like temperamentally
or sexually let's say are still going to
have to contend with the fact that they
have to integrate that within a
community difference is good now you
stand up and say
um I'm a victim yeah right and it's like
well okay well let's why are you a
victim let's explore that because
victims aren't okay here so what are you
going to do about it well I'm going to
post on Instagram it's like what else
might you do besides that I really care
about this I'm going to post twice the
problem with the victim narrative isn't
so much the observation that unfair
things happen to people and sometimes
even systematically it's like for sure
that's the case
um the issue is
do you remove from yourself all sense of
agency and
comrade Power by construing yourself as
the tragic victim of like hyper powerful
and irresistible forces the answer to
that is yes all my agency is removed
then the victim narrative is
is actually what's victimizing right and
so so if if you if you said life's
unfair yeah the answer would be of
course it is what are you going to do
about it if you're not willing to do
something about it personally then it
must not be that big an issue well it's
also the case that life is unfair in
weird ways you know I mean one of the
things that the Marxist types for
example point to is the fact that well
wealth is concentrated in the hands of a
few and that tends to be the case and
they tend to be they tend to be older
it's like yeah okay older people one of
the one of the best predictors of wealth
is age right so but then you think well
wait a second are we really so upset
about that first of all is it obvious to
me at all that like the typical 75 year
old
wealthy white male
would probably give up 99 of his fortune
to be an attractive 18 year old man
right right and so there is biological
Capital right and when you're young you
have a lot of biological capital and
then possibly what you do is you
exchange some of that biological capital
for monetary Capital as it as the
biological capital deteriorates and it
doesn't look to me that like it's not
self-evident at all that
that produces all the advantage on the
side of the people with the monetary
Capital right not at all right in fact a
lot of what you spend your money on if
you have monetary capital is the attempt
to regain biological Capital right so so
the the analysis of where the Pareto
distribution uh Advantage lies is very
unsophisticated well and and that's
that's why I mean we'll have these kind
of debates and the question is if you're
concerned about an injustice is there
Injustice absolutely
what are you going to do about yeah like
what are you going to do is there
Injustice of course there is let's go do
something about it there's either
incredible opportunity or extremely
unfair Injustice
go pick something to do well if you're
not willing to go get an apprenticeship
or go do work or go see one person well
that's the other problem too is that I
think that the universities have offered
young people a really easy way out
because they're looking for a pathway to
Virtue right that's part of the Miss
ionic impulse of late adolescence and
the universities say well all you have
to do is identify the problem one
problem when there's actually like a
thousand Rivals right and and not
obviously reducible to a single problem
and then all you have to do is oppose
the problem
and that's not right that right like I
talked to this woman Temple Grandin who
um has redesigned all the cattle
handling facilities in slaughterhouses
across the world autistic woman from the
University of Chicago absolute genius
amazing person amazing person and uh
you know she cared about Animal Welfare
but she was realistic girl she grew up
on a farm she knew what animals were
like she's no Pie in the Sky dreamer and
autistic people tend not to be right and
she spent her whole life
working on that problem and she's
ameliorated a tremendous amount of
animal suffering but not because she was
concerned about it right because she was
concerned about it and then she devoted
her whole life to it yes right and so
and that's how you accrue genuine moral
virtue well think of it we would tell
her story as a hero story yeah I'm like
this is what you go do oh and by the way
it it's going to cost you your whole
life yeah right oh and the other
question is
if you're not going to spend your life
on that you're going to spend it on
something yes absolutely right and so
let's take one step yes let's go to help
one cow at the I mean you're like if
you're gonna help animal cruelty yeah
let's go do something about one animal
to rescue it in a systematic way you
could build so we have people from the
left lots of left right in the Active
network yeah but they believe in
principles of fair play and freedom and
you know and they sign off and they say
and then you have a debate and that's
and that's what reasonably confident
people who want to fix something
actually do so you you've talked about
what you're doing in element preschool
elementary junior high high school Etc
yeah talked about the apprenticeship
programs and the distributed games and
the multiplicity of games and the idea
that each person has something valid to
contribute without that degenerating
into a you know mindless Equity outcome
game what's happening at what do you
what are you doing on the higher
education so we have kind of a moonshot
project it probably won't work but we're
working hard on it and it's this
question of how do people discover their
calling now at the Academy because we
start so young and they're in it all the
time
people will find not their calling
because when you're young that's too big
but their next great adventure in life
like what am I going to do for two years
and so we think we've developed the
right questions to ask and we've
actually given back our MBA
accreditation and closed the NBA School
successful as it was because we could
only serve 50 people a year and that
wasn't enough and so we've created a
series of challenges you can do in the
real world
with a group or a loan that are out in
the world doing it that will help you
figure out what you should do with your
next great adventure in life we've uh
we're going to run probably a hundred
people through it we're running 100
people to it now and the end of this
process is to be able to stand in a room
full of people you've invited and say
this is what I'm going to do next yeah
here's how I'm going to matter yeah yeah
here's who I am and where I come from
yeah
will you help me I need not money but I
need an introduction I need a piece of
factory floor I need something if you
will here's what I promise to give back
in return right right so it's like an
investor pitch in something it's like an
investor pitch for your life right right
and
um our foundation is willing to give up
to a hundred thousand dollars per pitch
now a lot of them are a thousand dollars
right yeah a hundred thousand actually
extraordinary it's tied to you actually
following through
and the idea is if we can get this
delivered
out in the world and you're using a
phone it's not distance learning it's
like a GPS like it's something you can
communicate with with your friends and
get together we're trying to see if we
can find the patterns of how people
actually stumble into an adventure or
calling
and then by these talks having them like
Ted Talks all around the country yeah
and that we're going to use that for our
high schoolers but also use that to
attract people of that age and college
age to try to find what they want to do
in their lives so that's a grand
experiment it's in the early stages well
we tried that as you know we tried that
a bit with our future authoring program
and one of the ways that we've helped
people narrow in on that it's like well
what do you want to do well that's
pretty vague question and it's very
Global and so it's complex and daunting
and so we broke that down into eight
things that people generally do you know
what's your vision for an intimate
relationship family friendship Job and
Career Education use of time outside
work civic responsibility and regulation
of Temptation right now sort of the big
problem is what's the purpose of my life
that's broken down into a set of domains
of probable problems and it's easier for
people to answer those questions
generally than the men than the meta
question I'm nodding because we
subscribe and use I mean it acted we use
self-authoring as a tool and and also in
this project we've looked at those
individual areas and broken them into
something you might do so example for
the family you might have with your
friends a Socratic discussion it's your
daughter's first dance recital
um
but your biggest customer just called
there's been a factory there's been a
fire at his Factory right you go to the
dance recital or the factory right
whichever you choose it gets harder it's
her wedding
or it's your only customer or you know
so right right so now I'm going to do
that with friends but then I might
actually have to write a spousal
contract with my spouse or significant
other
and submit that to the group of this is
what we've each promised each other and
here's how we're going to measure it and
so yeah think of this as these are
Visionary 300 challenges that are hard
to do and require courage and sometimes
it might be going on and haggling for a
discount to see what your relationship
with money is yeah but we're testing
those with groups and then asking how is
this going to help you like
self-authoring take the next step
towards a Target you've picked of where
you can spend your valuable life and so
that's the experiment that's fun we'll
see how it's gonna go it's gonna be fun
it's gonna be fun yeah yeah well you
should learn a lot conducting that
experiment yeah well it's so nice that
it's so
fulfilling
to provide people with methods to
develop a vision for their life I mean
we've been stunned by what the future
authoring program was capable of doing I
mean our research indicated that it
raised grade point average among
students in high level universities 35
percent this is a 90-minute intervention
that's crazy and dropped the dropout
rate 50 percent and most effectively
among minority men who had a poor
academic record so it was even better at
eliminating their Dropout because they
have a story yeah their life they're an
actionable story yeah yeah yeah and then
they started to develop both a vision
and a strategy and also to see
themselves as
Visionary strategists which is a
metacognitive shift now now imagine this
as there's 300 high schoolers or college
kids coming together to do this program
you're invited by a friend to come to
some mysterious party where it all gets
kicked off
and you start doing these challenges and
sampling them well that's where you may
meet your mate yeah right so that's
where you're going to paint your face
and go to the football game so we're
trying to see is can we create that in a
bottom-up way yeah and will we be
successful nah we'll mess it up and
we'll experiment but it's a cool it's an
interesting experiment to see if that's
the replacement because colleges are not
helping people find their calling they
don't do that anymore I mean and so
we're really trying to say can we get
people off on an adventure so that's
that's the experiment all right all
right all right well that's probably a
good place to wrap up unless there is
anything you can think of that we should
have touched on in this part of the
discussion I'm going to move for
everyone watching and listening I do an
extra 30 minutes with my guests I'm very
interested in how people's Destiny makes
itself manifest to them in the course of
their life particularly if they've been
successful because well why wouldn't you
want to hear about
why wouldn't you want to hear about
multiple Pathways to success assuming
that you're trying to accomplish
something like that for yourself which
seems preferable to the alternative by
the way and so we'll switch to the Daily
wire plus platform
um is there anything else that we didn't
cover today that you think would be no I
just want to thank you because your
focus on story
and listening to you and the archetypes
and how story matters has greatly
impacted all the decisions we've made
over the last 10 years to be able to
provide those same kinds of patterns for
young people all around the world and it
wouldn't it would not have happened in
the same way without you so thank you oh
hey man well I when I hear you say that
I think yeah well it and that wouldn't
have happened with all the group without
all the great people that I read who
knew that sort of who knew that who were
able to provide me with that knowledge
you know I mean I had great
instructors practically my mentors
people like Robert peel and then also
the people I was fortunate enough to
be introduced to in various ways while I
was in university and so it's great to
see this sort of information make itself
manifest you know Camille Paglia great
literary critics suggested to me at one
point that had the universities turned
to the jungian school Carl Jung and
mirchia Elliott and Eric Neumann then
deep narrative analysts instead of
dareda and Foucault that the entire
history of the development of higher
education would have been absolutely the
last 40 years absolutely it's very
interesting to see that starting to
happen and I really see it is spreading
like mad the idea that there are these
fundamental unifying narratives Contra
the post-modernist Viewpoint that they
don't point to power as the fundamental
human motivation right but there's
something like the ongoing humble search
for continued Enlightenment something
like that yeah it's a wonderful thing to
see that all about that is the battle
between good and evil yeah it really is
yeah yeah yeah yeah so all right welcome
to everybody watching and listening on
YouTube and the associated platforms
thanks for your time and attention uh to
the Daily wire plus people for
facilitating this conversation making it
possible practically that's much
appreciated to the film crew here in
Fort Worth Texas because that's where we
are today thank you guys for your help
today and uh join us on the daily wire
plus platform for an additional half an
hour of just question with Jeff Sandifer
thanks very much everyone
hello everyone I would encourage you to
continue listening to my conversation
with my guest on dailywireplus.com